---
layout: post
title:  "Cryptography"
date:   2017-03-06 
categories: CompSec
---
Q:
Will you talk about botnets?
Can you look at weather?
How do you calculate the probability of something being cracked? (yes 26^3) (but real life)
what about include a parity bit inside the bit stream?
Do we treat IVs and keys the same ay?


Xkasdps! (8 letters, basically true random?)

Cryptography
http://l2-news.com/coordinates/XKASD
Authentication
Integrity
Nonrepudiation
Availability

Plaintext (cleartext) message P
Encryption E(p)
produces -> ciphertext c = e(p)
key
cipher

Restricted Cipher
secret algorithm
	Secrecy by obliqueness.obfuscation
	vulnerable to: leaking, reverse engineering

Shared Algorithms and secret keys
Bump key = physical locks

Kerckhoff's Principle (1883)
A cryptosystem should be secure even if everything about the system, except the key is public knowledge
secret should rest entirely on the key

Good cryptosystem:
white noise, random noise


Brute Force
C = Ek(P)
P = Dk(C)
symmetric

Substitution
Caesr cipher
Shift cipher, simple variant, 
each letter replaced by one n positions aay modulo alphabet size. n = shift value = key
in Caesr's time key as 3. 

India - similar scheme
Pig latin

Last seen as ROT13 on Usenet to keep reader from seeing offensive messages unillingly


pair
[A...Z]
[U...T]
My cat has fleas, gswunbmufzyum

convey one piece of information for decrpytion: shift value
trivially easy to crack.

ATBASH

Monoalphabetic subsitution cipher


problem(key)

Easy to decode
Frequency Analysis

moby dick|shakespeare
-----------------
e 12.3% |
o 7.28 |
d 4.01 |
b 1.77 |
x .108 |

Letter Frequencies
E:12%
AHINORST:6-9.. etc
TH HE IN ER AN RE
THE ING AND HER ERE

DIGRAMS
TRIGRAMS
N-GRAMS

Polyalphabetic substitution ciphers

Multiple substituion,
Leon Battista Alberti: 1466: invented key

two disks
encrypt and decrypt

simple cipher, two rings, initial position is known

the second part of cipher is rotated to a new alignment

Vigenere polyalphabetic cipher
Use table and key ord to encpher a message, repeat keywoard over text: eg key = FACE

Matrix

Determine key length, count coincidences - identical characters n characters apart. find high values of n - that tells you the period of the key

Determine values f each character of the key, you know the length of they key - that's the # of Caesar ciphers you have
do a feq analysis of each position

Index of conicidence

One-time pads
Invented in 1917

each key letter on the pad encrypts exactly one plaintext character 
encryption is addition of characters modulo 26, 
sender destroys pages that have been used
reciever maintains an identical pad.

exclusive or

or means set bit, and means clear bit. exclor flip a bit or not flip a bit	

Perfect secrecy only when used properly
-keys needs to be as long as message
-key storage can be problematic,
may need to store a lot of data
-keys have to be generated randomly, no pseudorandom

Anyone who condisers arithmetical methods of producing random digits is, of course, in a state of sin

Seed

Stream cipher

Key sream generator produces a sequence of pseudo-random bytes, 
	key -> key stream generator -> 
	*statistically random (but weakness is seed)
	--> approximates one time pad s0 s1 s2....sn
								  p0 p1 p2....pn
								  ci = si (+) pi
								  
WE can never reuse keys

C = A (+) K
C' = B (+) K
C (+) C' = A (+) B <- common words

You can guess A and see the outcome at B


Electro mechanical cryptographic engines

Rotor machines
1920s mechanical devices used for autmating encryption, 
not a one to one match
each disk has a substitution alphabet

output of each rotor is fed through to next rotor.
one rotor rotates by one position.

->  polyalphabetic substitution cipher

3 , 26^3 17,576 possible rotor positions

Transposition
Skytale

padding

still vulnerable to frequency analysis.

Can have hybrid ADFGVX cipher(WWI)



Computer - Block Ciphers.
encrypt a fixed number of bits at a time. output blocksize (usually) = input blocksize


Multiple rounds of combining the plaintext with the key (optional) converty key to internal form

DES:16 rounds
AES:10-14 rounds, depending on key length



DES 1976 (adopted), fips
block cipher, 64 bit blocks, 56 bit key
Substitution followed by a permuatation (transposition)
-16 rounds

S-BOX

For DES, cascading (doubling cipher) is okay
the weakness is the meet in the middle attack

triple des is 112 and 168


CTR mode -< intialization vector.
encrypt the counter with key, exclusive or result ith the plaintext blocks
value of counter will be pseudorandom, recipient has to generate same counter stream.. need the same IV?

More common approach Cipher block chaining CBC mode
	random initialization vector = bunch of k random bits
		exclor ith first plaintext blck - then encrypt the block
			take exclor of result..
			
	intuitive idea... 
	the weakness is iv source
	
	identical plaintext does not produce the same cipher text,
	
	an attacker can still cause data corruption
	
	what about include a parity bit inside the bit stream?
	
key explosion
each pair of users need a separate key for secure communication (key between each pairing of nodes)
n(n-1)/2 keys = n users

Secure key distribution is the biggest problem with symmetric cryptography (IV)

Invention of public key cryptography
C = Ek1(p) P = Dkw(c) -> public
.. private

public and private are mathematically related but not derivable from the other

RSA, Ellipic Curve Algo, DSS

Unlike symmetrric. key length is an issue

RSA Encryption

Diffie Hellman Key Excange
not public key encryption
